Installation on Unix:
---------------------

This file describes the standard installation procedure. Special hints for
some platforms can be found in file unix/PLATFORMS.

1. (Optional)
   Convert the sources to your local character set.
   They are distributed in ISO Latin-1 character set.
   See file unix/CONVERT for more information.

2. (Optional)
   Choose which C compiler to use for building CLISP.
   This is normally not necessary; if GNU C is available under the
   name "gcc", it will be used.

   For example, if you were wanting to use gcc with full warnings, then
   type, if you are using csh:

         setenv CC "gcc -Wall"

   or if you are using bash or ksh:

         export CC="gcc -Wall"

   or if you are using sh:

         CC="gcc -Wall"
         export CC

3. Choose the name of a directory in which to build CLISP.
   (This allows you to build CLISP with different compilers on the same
   machine or for different architectures in the same filesystem, sharing
   the same source.)
   For example, depending on the chosen compiler, let's use with-gcc-wall.
   Then execute

         ./configure with-gcc-wall

   This will prepare a directory with-gcc-wall/ and figure out many
   system and compiler dependent parameters needed by CLISP.

   (Note: Some `make's - for example the HP-UX make - have problems
   with symbolic links. You may avoid these by calling

         ./configure

   without argument. Then CLISP will be built in the src/ directory
   itself.)

   Note that the argument to configure can be an absolute pathname.
   For example, the following command will also work.

         ./configure /tmp/with-gcc-wall 

4. The previous step printed a recommendation how to continue. Follow
   the recommendation: Go to this directory

         cd with-gcc-wall

   and build the makefile that controls compilation:

         ./makemake > Makefile

   If you wish to compile the sources such that you may debug them,
   then type instead:

         ./makemake debug > Makefile

   The makemake command also accepts a couple of --with-PACKAGE options.
   To get a list of the supported options, try

         ./makemake --help

5. If you wish to build CLISP with add-on modules, edit Makefile and change
   the line defining the MODULES variable.

6. Type

         make config.lsp

   and edit the contents of config.lsp appropriately for your site,
   especially the definitions of short-site-name and long-site-name.

   If you have unpacked some add-on modules (see the main INSTALL file for
   a list), you may choose to build clisp with them. Just add the module
   directories to the line defining MODULES in the makefile.

   On Linux (0.99.11 or newer) or SunOS 4, you may also choose to enable
   support for immutable objects (checking that program text and quoted
   constants loaded from files are never destructively modified) by
   adding -DIMMUTABLE to the line defining CFLAGS in the makefile.

   For platform specific adjustment of the makefile, take a look at the
   PLATFORMS file.

7. Type

         make

   to build CLISP.
   If you are an expert in building CLISP, you may alternatively do this
   in seven steps:
         make init                prepares all symbolic links and utilities
         make allc                makes all *.c files
         make libreadline.a       makes the readline library (not needed
                                  if --with-noreadline was specified)
         make lisp.run            makes the executable
         make interpreted.mem     a memory image with everything uncompiled
         make lispinit.mem        makes all *.fas files and
                                  a memory image with everything compiled
         make manual              makes the documentation
         make modular             makes the base module set (only needed
                                  if --with-dynamic-ffi was specified)
   The sixth step is the most time consuming: it takes an hour on a Sun4 and
   may take several hours on a slower machine.

   If something goes wrong, check and optionally modify the contents of
   the file unixconf.h and retry this step. Yes, there are many warnings,
   I know. Most of them are harmless.

   If you need to switch to a different compiler, execute a
         make distclean
         cd ..
   and go back to step 2.

8. (Optionally)
   Two more tests for CLISP. Let the compiler (now compiled!) recompile itself:

         make test

   Check whether CLISP passes the test suite:

         make testsuite

9. Edit the `prefix' variable in the makefile (you could also have specified
   it as command line option --prefix=... to `configure' in step 3), then type

         make install

   If `prefix' is /usr/local, then this will install the CLISP binaries
   into /usr/local/bin and /usr/local/lib (creating a directory
   /usr/local/lib/lisp) and the manual page into /usr/local/man/man1.
   You may need superuser privileges for this step when installing into
   public directories.

10. If you want other people to profit from your work, you can make a binary
   distribution of CLISP for your platform which I will distribute.
   To do this, make sure you have executed step 7 above, adjust the definitions
   of ROFF_MAN, PACK, PACKOPT, PACKEXT in the makefile, then type

          make distrib

   to create a binary distribution in /tmp/clisp.tar.z. Tell me about your
   success, and ftp that file to a location I will indicate you.

   If you want to distribute the binaries, recall that you have to accompany
   them with full source; see the files COPYING and GNU-GPL.

11. The last thing to do:

         cd ..


Authors:
--------

        Bruno Haible
        Michael Stoll

Email: haible@clisp.cons.org

